=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

simecek-tools - Decode Petr Šimeček's files on representability of CI structures on 4 random variables

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    $ wget -qO- http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/pbin.dat | sim-ci
    111111111111101110111101
    111111111111101110111111
    111111111111101010101111
    111111111111100111111111
    111111111111111111111111
    111111111111101101111111
    ...

    $ wget -qO- http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/pbin.rep | sim-dist --moments
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/4 1/4 1/4 0 0 0 0 0
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/4 1/4 1/2 0 0 -1/4 1/4 -1/4
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/4 1/4 1/2 0 0 0 0 -1/4
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/4 1/2 1/2 0 -1/4 1/4 0 -1/2
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/2 1/2 1/2 -1/4 -1/4 -1/4 1/4 -1/4
    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/4 1/4 0 1/4 0 0 -1/4 1/4 0
    ...

    $ wget -qO- http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/pbin.rep | sim-dist
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(1/64) +-+-(5/64) +--+(5/64) +---(13/64) -+++(13/64) -++-(5/64) -+-+(5/64) -+--(1/64) --++(5/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(1/64) +-+-(5/64) +--+(5/64) +---(13/64) -+++(17/64) -++-(1/64) -+-+(1/64) -+--(5/64) --++(5/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(3/64) +-+-(3/64) +--+(3/64) +---(15/64) -+++(15/64) -++-(3/64) -+-+(3/64) -+--(3/64) --++(5/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(5/64) +-+-(1/64) +--+(1/64) +---(17/64) -+++(17/64) -++-(1/64) -+-+(5/64) -+--(1/64) --++(1/64) --+-(5/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(1/64) +-+-(5/64) +--+(5/64) +---(13/64) -+++(21/64) -++-(1/64) -+-+(1/64) -+--(1/64) --++(1/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(5/64)
    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(1/64) +-+-(5/64) +--+(9/64) +---(9/64) -+++(13/64) -++-(5/64) -+-+(1/64) -+--(5/64) --++(5/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)
    ...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This repository contains some small tools to decode the files created by
Petr Šimeček's when he studied representability of CI structures on four
random variables and which are published on his website:

=over

=item *
L<http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/>

=back

=head2 sim-ci

Takes one of the C<.dat> files containing CI structures and prints its
contents in a binary string format compatible with L<https://gaussoids.de>.
Please refer to Šimeček's and our web page for explanations of those two
formats.

=head2 sim-dist

Takes one of the C<.rep> files (there is actually only one, C<pbin.rep>)
and prints its contents. This file contains in each record the moments of
a binary probability distribution as an array of fifteen IEEE 754 doubles
(little endian). With the B<--moments> option, these moments are printed,
in order and separated by spaces. Otherwise the probability distribution
is reconstructed and printed.

A sample B<--moments> line looks like this (refer to the web page for the
order of moments):

    0 0 0 0 -1/2 -1/2 -1/2 1/4 1/4 1/4 0 0 0 0 0

whereas when printing the whole distribution, we prefix each probability
with the 4-element vector which is the elementary event of the probability.
The distributions are over the state space {+1, -1}, which are abbreviated
to just C<+> and C<-> in the output:

    ++++(1/64) +++-(1/64) ++-+(1/64) ++--(5/64) +-++(1/64) +-+-(5/64) +--+(5/64) +---(13/64) -+++(13/64) -++-(5/64) -+-+(5/64) -+--(1/64) --++(5/64) --+-(1/64) ---+(1/64) ----(1/64)

This script uses the L<bigrat> pragma in Perl to do all computations with
arbitrary precision rational numbers. This makes some sense because the
moments are mostly negative powers of two which have an exact representation
in IEEE 754. Using bigrats prevents errors from occuring when these
exact numbers are combined to compute the probabilities. The last three
models could not be exactly stored, please refer to Šimeček's work for
exact expressions.

=head2 dual4

This is an auxilliary script to compute the dual of a given semigraphoid
in the binary string format, as output by C<sim-ci>. It can be used to see
that the discrete representable CI structures on four variables are not
closed under duality, simply by comparing

    $ wget http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/alldis.dat
    $ diff -u0 <(sim-ci alldis.dat | dual4) <(sim-ci alldis.dat) | grep ^-

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item *
The files are available on Petr Šimeček's website:
L<http://atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~simecek/skola/models/>

=back

=head1 THANKS

Thanks go to Petr Šimeček who did the actual work.

=head1 AUTHOR

Tobias Boege <tobs@taboege.de>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is copyright (C) 2019 by Tobias Boege.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.
